1. Excellence, State-of-the-art and objectives 

1.1 Structural Health Monitoring via GNSS

Since the mid-1990, Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) have been used to 
monitor dynamic deformation of structures such as long bridges, towers and tall 
buildings, mainly to investigate structural vibrations induced by a wide variety 
of sources (e.g. wind, temperature, traffic, etc). This process of implementing 
damage detection and performance analysis strategies for engineering structures 
are defined as Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) [Kaloop et al, 2017]. SHM 
systems are utilized to analyze and predict the health state of structures 
under unknown future environmental conditions.

SHM via GNSS is mostly performed in complement to a series of in-situ sensors, 
such as accelerometers, gyroscopes, etc . That is due to a series of limiting 
factors, such as:
  * limited accuracy of GNSS
  * data sampling/acquisition rates
  * obstacles in the surrounding area (such as tall buildings, antennas)  
    especially for urban areas
  * complicated and time consuming data analysis requirements

With the constant advance in recent years in the field of GNSS, geodetic 
monitoring systems are developed especially for structures’ monitoring. 
According to [Im et al, 2013], GNSS currently represent the highest 
advanced geodetic monitoring systems used to evaluate structures’ behavior.
GNSS monitoring systems are improved to measure dynamic responses up to 50Hz 
[Yi et al, 2013], hence enabling the monitoring of a wide range of structures, 
such as dams, long- and short-span bridges, seismic evaluations, and tall 
buildings.

Using a real-time kinematic (RTK) approach, GNSS measurements can reach an 
accuracy of a few centimeters (typically 1-5cm [Yi et al, 2013]), while recent  
experiments conducted using the Precise Point Processing (PPP) approach have 
also reported same levels of accuracy [Moschas et al, 2015].

GNSS sampling frequency plays a dominant part in dynamic performance analysis. 
Over the past few years, there was significant improvement in the development 
of new methods and new hardware that increase the sampling frequency and signal 
collection techniques. Currently, GNSS receivers can collect observations with 
a sampling rate up to 100Hz. This fact raises the question of whether these 
systems can be used to monitor stiff structures, especially bridges and cantilever 
structures members with dominant frequencies greater than 3–4Hz, and dynamic 
movements of the order of a few millimeters. Such short-span bridges represent 
the majority of bridges on a global scale. Such structures represent a challenge 
because the 100Hz GPS sampling rate is compatible with the accelerometers’ 
sampling rate (100–200Hz) that are systematically used for structural analysis, 
whereas 100Hz data make it possible to overcome any problem of aliasing in stiff 
structures’ spectral data [Moschas et al 2014]. In addition, such data can 
typically overcome the problem of loss of peaks or of amplitude amplification 
[Moschas et al, 2015]. Very few studies have investigated experimentally the 
noise characteristics of 100Hz GPS data. In addition, this technology has been 
applied only in very few cases of relatively flexible structures (dominant 
frequencies of approximately 1.5Hz).

1.2 GNSS Monitoring Techniques

There are two basic modes of operation for GNSS; Point Positioning (PP), where 
the user utilizes the observations collected by a single receiver (or multiple 
receivers individually) and differential/network positioning (DGPS) where 
observations from multiple (at least two) receivers are combined and processed 
together. Both techniques offer a series of advantages and pose disadvantages 
and have been used for SHM. Typically, differential positioning offers improved 
accuracy compared to point positioning, posing however serious processing 
challenges and limitations (larger analysis requirements).

With the advance in GNSS hardware and methodologies (e.g. Precise Point 
Positioning), the two methods can now reach accuracies of a few centimeters, 
depending however on a large set of factors (processing mode, error and noise 
mitigation, environmental conditions, etc).

Additionally, data processing can be performed in either real-time or 
post-processing mode, for both PP and DGPS. Analysis in post-processing mode 
can offer significant advantages, but is not always fit for SHM.

While there are a few software packages that can perform high standard GNSS 
analysis in post-processing mode (e.g. Bernese, GIPSY/OSASIS, Gamit --TODO refs here--), 
there is a lack of tools when it comes to real-time processing. Normally, users 
would resolve to the non-free, non-open source tools developed by GNSS receiver 
manufacturers (e.g. [], []--TODO refs here--). These however, are usually 
surveying oriented, thus posing limitations to SHM.

1.3 Proposal objectives and challenges

1.4 State-of-the-art & Innovation

SHM by means of GNSS is a rapidly growing technology. Especially during the 
last years, with the rapid advancement of GNSS hardware and methodologies, it 
has started to attract the interest of a growing number of researchers around 
the world. The limits of this technology are yet to be discovered.

Within the framework of the current research project, we aim at exploring and 
implementing state-of-the art technology, using innovative methods to surpass 
current limitations. More specifically, we intend to address the following 
issues:

* Lack of Software
  ----------------
As stated above (--TODO where above?--), there is an apparent lack of software 
when it comes to the specific needs of implementing an SHM platform via GNSS. 
Most research groups have used packages and tools designed by receiver 
manufacturing companies (e.g. --TODO refs here--), which however pose several 
limitations, such as:
  * non-free and non-open source software; that is users have to purchase these 
  tools and are confined to their inherent methodologies, design and limitations. 
  Due to copyright limitations, even sophisticated users cannot alter the 
  software, to fit their specific needs.
  * surveying oriented; receiver manufacturing companies usually design software 
  packages aimed and oriented towards surveying needs. That means that precision 
  and accuracy standards are not high enough to meet the demands of high-precision 
  GNSS applications, such as SHM.
  * not state-of-the-art methodologies; these software packages are developed 
  to be user-friendly and reliable above all. Using and/or testing state-of-the-art 
  techniques, algorithms and methodologies is not a design objective and is 
  neglected in production code.

High precision, scientific oriented GNSS processing software packages (Bernese, 
GAMIT, GIPSY -- TODO refs here--) on the other hand, offer significant 
advantages when it comes to state-of-the-art analysis techniques, but have 
important drawbacks when it comes to implementing SHM related applications. 
The dominant disadvantages are:

  * no real-time analysis; such software tools are designed to perform 
  post-processing data analysis. Users first collect/acquire the dataset and 
  in a latter step "feed" the software using a batch processing mode. Real-time 
  data streams cannot be handled, thus inhibiting real-time monitoring.
  * no high-rate data analysis; most of the high-precision GNSS analysis tools, 
  are designed with the main focus being the processing of static, 30 second 
  data. With that being the main goal, analysis of high rate GNSS data (i.e. 
  sampling rates higher than 5-10Hz) is either not feasible at all, or 
  inefficient (--TODO check this a bit more--).
  * no or inefficient RTK mode; as stated above, such software is oriented 
  towards a post-processing static analysis. Hence processing data in RTK mode 
  is usually inefficient, if offered at all
  * not user-friendly; scientific, high precision software is aimed towards an 
  educated audience, mostly scientists and researchers involved in GNSS analysis. 
  SHM though, could be a field of study for researchers of various scientific 
  backgrounds (e.g. civil engineers), not necessarily related to in-depth GNSS 
  analysis techniques.

* GNSS Analysis Current Problems and Limitations
------------------------------------------------
Analysis of high-rate GNSS data, especially for sampling rates higher than 5Hz, 
poses a series of problems and challenges not yet fully understood. Due to the 
fact that this technology became only recently available, a wide range of 
scientific questions has risen and remains unanswered.

Processing methodologies for the efficient handling of such high-rate datasets 
are currently in a premature phase. We aim to address such questions and come 
up with innovative solutions and propositions. More specifically, we aim at 
studying:

  * efficient, real-time GNSS analysis techniques, implementing modern, 
  state-of-the-art data processing algorithms. Scientific computation methods 
  are now mature enough to handle large volume data in ever decreasing response 
  times. We intend to implement modern software design, using tools such as 
  distributing processing and multi-threading, to test the limits of read-time, 
  high-rate GNSS analysis.
  * inherent observation correlation of high-rate data; observations collected 
  at such high frequencies (>10Hz), are highly correlated, posing serious 
  challenges in their analysis (high levels of redundancy and dependence, can 
  lead to ill-formatted matrices). We intend to examine the issue in detail, 
  proposing ways to handle correlation, select optimal data and analysis 
  sampling rates (depending on the dynamic model under consideration, e.g. 
  vibration frequency under study).
  * noise characteristics of high frequency GNSS observations; this is a topic 
  of great importance for the efficient and accurate processing of high-rate 
  observations and their respective statistical analysis and evaluation. Recent 
  studies have shown that error sources affect monitoring systems for both short 
  and long monitoring times (e.g. [Moschas et al, 2013]); some researchers 
  introduced methods that can be used to detect the behavior of structures using 
  noise and error performances. For example, Peppa et al. [49] used the 
  signal-to-noise ratio of GPS measurements to detect structures movements. 
  Moreover, Souza and Negri [50] utilized the multipath effect to detect 
  structure movements. Mitigation and/or modeling of errors and noise is of the 
  highest importance in GNSS analysis, yet not fully understood and studied in 
  the case of high-rate, high precision applications.
  * multipath effects; this can be one of the main factors of precision 
  degradation in GNSS-based SHM applications ([27,28]) and one of the errors 
  hardest to model and mitigate efficiently. Especially in the case of SHM, 
  where large structures are under consideration, multipath induced errors can 
  cause severe loss of accuracy.
  * PPP ambiguity resolution; in recent years, the PPP methodology is used in 
  an ever growing number of applications. With the recent advances in GNSS 
  technology, the precision offered by this algorithm is rapidly approximating 
  the one reached by DGPS. Especially in real-time applications, where processing 
  speed is of the highest importance, this methodology offers great advantages. 
  However, these is still a limiting factor difficult to transcend and that is 
  effective ambiguity resolution. Resolving ambiguities to whole cycles (integers) 
  can improve GNSS positioning accuracy, but the integer character of ambiguities 
  is lost in PPP (where in contrast to DGPS common errors between receiver/antenna 
  pairs are not differenced out).

* Software Design for SHM
-------------------------
Normally, GNSS based SHM platforms, follow a two-step approach; in a first step, 
after of during GNSS data acquisition the dataset is processed to produce 
position estimates. In a later, individual step, these estimates are either 
compared to compute position differences (hence position dislocations) or are 
stacked to time-series where from harmonic signals and/or velocity can be 
identified and estimated. The latter option in performed in post-processing 
mode. This approach has the following drawbacks:

  * no SHM-specific software; position estimates are used, on a per-application 
    basis, to produce differences or time-series
  * no baseline approach; in DGPS mode, the primary analysis result is baseline 
    vectors between two receiver/antenna pairs. Computing coordinates from 
    baselines (via reference frame realization as performed in RTK) can result 
    in accuracy degradation(--TODO. Refs here--)
  * real-time time-series analysis; due to its complicated methodologies, 
    time-series analysis is normally performed in post-processing mode
    (--TODO refs here--).

1.4 Scientific and/or social impact

Our intention is for this proposal to have a pluralistic, multi-faceted impact 
on the scientific community. Both via our technical approach (i.e. 
state-of-the-art and innovative methodologies) and through the policy adopted 
(i.e. free and open software), we aim at a gross impact on the scientific 
community.

Real-time GNSS processing is a fast growing technology, constantly pushed forward 
in recent years by the advances in receiver technology, methodologies and global 
satellite systems. Note that in the following years, GNSS such as Galileo, 
BeiDou and IRNSS are expected to be expanded and/or fully operational and assist 
further positioning and/or navigation applications. In the last few years, a 
growing number of new methodologies is introduced, making use of high-rate 
capabilities and multi-GNSS data, to enhance accuracy and response time of 
analysis systems.

We intend on putting a great number of these methodologies to the test and 
provide vital feedback on their real-world efficiency and usability. This is of 
great importance to the scientific community, as a number of these methodologies
are only designed on a theoretical basis, or implemented individually (as opposed
to being incorporated in an integrated processing suite). Their evaluation, via
a "real-world" application, with strict demands on precision and resources, is
of critical value to the scientific community.

Innovative solutions are to be designed, tested and implemented where there is
lack of methodologies/algorithms; new techniques will be developed and current
approaches will be modified to fit the rigorous needs of a high-precision
monitoring system. Results and conclusions are to be returned to the scientific
comminity (via scientific papers and conference presentations).

The software suit to be developed, will be under a free and open policy, thus
freely disseminated and used by any interested party. Additionally, users will be
able to alter the tool (source code), in any way they see fit, to comply to their
specific needs. Hence, we expect that the proposal will have a long-lasting 
impact, as new users use the software and/or methodologies in a divergent series
of applications. Our ambition is that the software developed in the framework
of this project, will be a state-of-the-art, easy to use, veratile and robust
GNSS positioning suite, that will become a popular, widely used tool within the 
scientific community.

Precise, real-time, high-rate positioning and monitoring can have a vast number 
of applications, ranging from navigation to monitoring crustal deformation. The
latter is a scientific field of great importance and 
of primary interest in Greece, where earthquakes are very frequent. GPS/GNSS has 
revolutionized seismic research (https://www.earthmagazine.org/article/precise-fault-how-gps-revolutionized-seismic-research --TODO make this a ref--)
and is continuing to claim a growing role in the fields of tectonics, seismology and
geophysics. Research teams around the world, are tryig to demistify pre-, co- 
and post-seismic crustal behaviour by means of high-rate GNSS observations. Methodologies,
algorithms and techniques used for SHM can be applicable in such studies, as
both fields share the same set of rigorous demands: high-rate, high accuracy 
monitoring via GNSS. Hence, this proposal aspires to be a work of significant
scientific impact in various fields of science and engineering, where precise GNSS
positioning is used. Results, conclusions and innovative propositions can be 
directly applied to an ever growing number of applications.

Via the scientific community, the project can also have a social impact. Navigation
and positioning applications are very popular and widely used by the public.
State-of-the-art methodologies and tools (e.g. software libraries) introduced in 
the current proposal, can find their way in public oriented, proprietary or not
products (e.g. smart phone applications).

2.1 Research Methodology

<!--
Θα το λέμε SHM software/analysis/processing ή time-series software/analysis/processing ??
Processing unit ή computer ??
 -->

2.1.1 General Description

+------------------------------------------------------------+
|                    ____                                    |
| ____                /\                                     |
|  /\                /  \                                    |
| /  \   ____         |                                      |
|  |      /\          |                ____                  |
|  |     /  \         |                 /\                   |
|  |       |____rtcm  |                /  \                  |
| rtcm            |  rtcm                |                   |
|  |              |   |                  |                   |
|  |              V   V                 rtcm                 |
|  +-------------> +====+                |                   |
|                  | A  | <--------------+       +====+      |
|                  +====+ ---------------------> | B  |      |
|                   ^ ^                          +====+      |
|                   | |                                      |
| >--rtcm orbit cor-+ +--rtcm clock cor--<                   |
|                                                            |
| A: Computer with GNSS processing suite                     |
| B: Computer with SHM software suite                        |
|                                                            |
+------------------------------------------------------------+

With the current proposal, we aim at designing and building a GNSS based SHM
platform. This platform will be applicable in a wide variety of structures, with
the only prerequisite being an as clear as possible horizon, so that the GNSS
receivers can acquire satellite transmitted signals. The fundamental building
blocks of the platform, are:
  * one or more GNSS receiver/antenna pairs
  * a software suite to process GNSS observations
  * a software suite to analyze and visualize position or baseline dynamics

The characteristics of the platform, will be:
  * ability to use multi-GNSS observations (GPS, GLONASS, GALILEO)
  * ability to use high-rate data (up to 100Hz)
  * real-time data streaming, aquisition, processing and visualization
  * high-precision, rigorous GNSS data processing
  * ability to work in PP or network (DGPS) mode
  * analysis of GNSS derived position/baseline time-series to study structure
    dynamics

The design of the platform includes one or more pairs of GNSS receiver/antenna pairs.
These shall be installed on or near the structure to be monitored, in positions
of interest. The receivers will collect and transmitt GNSS data, in real-time, via
the internet to a central processing unit, that can be anywhere (not necessarily
in the vicinity of the structure). This processing unit will be equiped with a
GNSS processing software suite which will analyze the incoming data in real-time mode,
and estimate position coordinates or baseline vectors (between receiver/antenna pairs).
These estimates will in turn be fed to a time-series analysis software, installed
on the same or a remote processing unit, where the results will be visualized and
the dynamics analyzed.

2.1.2 General Considerations

The platform suggested is designed to be as versatile as possible. Users can
exploit observations of multiple GNSS, or fall back to GPS-only data if the
receivers are not of GNSS technology. Additionally, they can use PP or DGPS mode,
depending on their needs; that means that only one receiver/antenna pair can be
enough to monitor points of interest. The two fundamental software suits (GNSS processing 
and SHM analysis) will be completely independent and it is not even mandatory 
that they be installed on the same processing unit (e.g GNSS processing could be performed
on a remote, high-capability processing unit, whereas the results could be visualized
on a laptop at the vicinity of the structure).

This design versatility enables the platform to be applicable or easily addaptable  
to a wide variety of applications aside from SHM, e.g. real-time monitoring of
crustal deformation (for earthquakes).

2.1.3 The receiver/antenna part
Instrumentation of GNSS based platforms consists of one or more GNSS receiver/antenna pairs. 
These are installed on points of interest on or near the structure under study. 
For the proposed project, the receivers can have the following characteristics:
  * can be GPS-only or multi-GNSS; the processing software will be able to analyze
    GPS-only data or multi-GNSS if available
  * data sampling rates of high frequencies; in SHM platforms data is collected
    in high frequencies (typically over 5Hz), so that users can estimate high 
    frequency dynamics
  * RTCM streaming capability; real-time data streaming (from receivers to the
    central processing unit where the GNSS software will be installed), will be
    performed via internet and according to the RTCM standards. RTCM is a very
    common format for such purposes and all receivers, even of old technology, can
    transmit data using RTCM.

All in all, for the platform to work, very scarce demands are made on receiver 
technology. However, state-of-the-art technology (e.g. multi-GNSS, high-rate data) 
are fully supported.

2.1.4 GNSS processing
The GNSS processing software suite, will have the following key features:
  * acquire and decode trnasmitted data from the receiver(s)
  * process the data using state-of-the-art methodologies; station coordinates or
    baseline vectors will be estimated
  * transmit data to SHM software
All of the above steps will be performed in real-time, using an as efficient as
possible toolchain.

2.1.4.1 General Design
Having efficiency and modern design in mind, the programming language of choice
(for both the GNSS processing and the SHM suite) is C++. Python (programming language)
will also be used for wrappers, bindings and scripts. Any library to be used, will
strictly follow an open and free software policy. Care will be taken for the
software to be fully POSIX compliant.

2.1.4.2 GNSS processing
The GNSS software suite will play the key part in the platform. It will receive the
data streams from the receivers, process the data and in a final step transmit the
analysis results. All of these steps will be performed in real-time.

The input will consist of RTCM formated data, transmitted from the receivers; high-rate 
GNSS data streams (up to 100Hz) will be fully supported. Satellite signals from GPS-only 
or multi-GNSS (GPS, GLONASS and GALILEO) receivers will be handled by the suite. 
Additionally, real-time product/correction streams (i.e. satellite orbit and clock 
corrections) could be used as input to improve postitioning accuracy. The software 
will also support a series of GNSS standards (e.g. ANTEX, IONEX), defined and maintained 
by the International GNSS Service (IGS), to assist the analysis.

Users will be able to choose between a PPP and a network (DGPS) approach, depending on
the application at hand. State-of-the-art methodologies will be implemented for both
approaches. The pillars of the software desing will be efficiency and precission. We
are going to test and evaluate bleading edge methodologies and design and implement 
new approaches, methods and algorithms where needed. State-of-the-art models for 
error mitigation will be applied and efficient, robust filtering techniques will be
implemented for precise estimation.

2.1.5 SHM analysis
